Update optimizer docs to include new unchecked loop increment (#14650)
ethereum/solidity: docs/internals/optimizer.rst

The Optimizer
*************

> The Solidity compiler involves optimizations at three different levels (in order of execution):
> - Optimizations in code generation based on a direct analysis of solidity code.
> - Optimizing transformations on the Yul IR code.
> - Optimizations on the opcode level.

Reviewer: You need an empty line after lists in RST. Please check the rendered version to make sure the formatting is not broken.

While at it, I'd also suggest small tweaks:

```suggestion
The Solidity compiler involves optimizations at three different levels (in order of execution):

- Optimizations during code generation based on a direct analysis of Solidity code.
- Optimizing transformations on the Yul IR code.
- Optimizations at the opcode level.
```

Author: Done.

The Optimizer
*************

The Solidity compiler uses three different optimizer modules: The "old" optimizer

> that operates at the opcode level and two "new" optimizers that operates on Yul IR code

Author: ```suggestion
that operates at the opcode level and two "new" optimizers that operate on Yul IR code
```

> and another that removes unnecessary overflow checks of code generation of ``for`` loops.

Reviewer 2: Let's maybe rephrase this generally - the distinction between "old" and "new" is somewhat obsolete since we generally realized that at least parts of the "old optimizer" will stay around.

```suggestion
The Solidity compiler involves optimizations at three different levels (in order of execution):
- Optimizations in code generation based on a direct analysis of solidity code.
- Optimizing transformations on the Yul IR code.
- Optimizations on the opcode level.
```

side-effect free and its result is multiplied by zero, you can remove the function
call completely.

The codegen-based optimizer is a single step that makes the compiler use unchecked

> arithmetic when generating code of a ``for`` loop counter variable increment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The codegen-based optimizer currently consists of a single step that makes the compiler use unchecked
arithmetic when generating code for the counter variable increment of certain ``for`` loops.
```

side-effect free and its result is multiplied by zero, you can remove the function
call completely.

> The codegen-based optimizer currently consists of a single step that makes the compiler use unchecked
> arithmetic when generating code for the counter variable increment of certain ``for`` loops.

Reviewer 3: What about rephrasing it to:

```suggestion
The codegen-based optimizer currently consists of a single step, wherein the compiler utilizes unchecked arithmetic
when generating code for incrementing the counter variable in specific ``for`` loops.
```

Author: Much better. Thanks!

> arithmetic when generating code for the counter variable increment of certain ``for`` loops.

Reviewer: Actually, this is not the only step performed in the codegen. I've seen comments that indicate that `settings.optimizer.orderLiterals` is also a codegen-level optimization (in the legacy codegen):

https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/blob/7df949edb22598e9d946660020c5390d0ce81bf8/libsolidity/interface/OptimiserSettings.h#L134-L136

It's value is passed to `ExpressionCompiler`, not to the optimizer, which confirms that.

Author: I was not aware of `orderLiterals`.
In that case, I think we should also add (in a future PR) a doc section for that step under the `Codegen-Based Optimizer Module` section.

Reviewer: Still, in this PR we should not say that the new loop step is the only codegen-level optimization. Here we could just mention that the other step exists without going into detail about it.

Author: Yes. I have rewritten the relevant sections to reflect that.

Currently, the parameter ``--optimize`` activates the opcode-based optimizer for the
generated bytecode and the Yul optimizer for the Yul code generated internally, for example for ABI coder v2.
One can use ``solc --ir-optimized --optimize`` to produce an
optimized Yul IR for a Solidity source. Similarly, one can use ``solc --strict-assembly --optimize``
for a stand-alone Yul mode.

.. note::
    The `peephole optimizer <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peephole_optimization>`_ and

>     the codegen-based optimizer are always enabled by default and can only be turned off

Reviewer: I'd mention just the new step. `orderLiterals` is not always enabled and also when we add more codegen steps in the future, it will be easy to forget to update this note.

Author: Done.

side-effect free and its result is multiplied by zero, you can remove the function
call completely.

The codegen-based optimizer consists of two steps, the first of which changes the
order of literals in binary operators, moving them to the right. The second one
enables the compiler to utilize unchecked arithmetic when generating code for
incrementing the counter variable in certain ``for`` loops.

Currently, the parameter ``--optimize`` activates the opcode-based optimizer for the
generated bytecode and the Yul optimizer for the Yul code generated internally, for example for ABI coder v2.
One can use ``solc --ir-optimized --optimize`` to produce an
optimized Yul IR for a Solidity source. Similarly, one can use ``solc --strict-assembly --optimize``
for a stand-alone Yul mode.

.. note::
    The `peephole optimizer <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peephole_optimization>`_ and
    the :ref:`unchecked loop increment optimizer <unchecked-loop-optimizer>` are always

>     enabled by default and can only be turned off via the :ref:`Standard JSON <compiler-api>`.

Reviewer: Oh, one more thing I just realized while looking at the same spot in #14657. This originally mentioned only the peephole optimizer but there are more steps that are on by default (e.g. the jumpdest remover).

I'm sure we will not be able to keep it in sync once we add more steps like this. Maybe it would be best to just make it list those steps as examples, and not make it seem like it's an exhaustive list. I.e. say that **some** steps like the peephole optimizer or the increment optimizer are on by default?

Author: Yeah, agree.
Rewritten it to say those are examples of steps enabled by default.

    }

The LiteralRematerialiser should be run before this step.

Codegen-Based Optimizer Module
==============================

Currently, the codegen-based optimizer module consists of only one step,
which makes the compiler automatically generate unchecked arithmetic code that
increments the counter variable of a `for` loop. The single step of this module,
which is explained next, avoids wasting gas unnecessarily, by identifying some
conditions that guarantee that the counter variable cannot overflow. This eliminates
the need to use a explicit unchecked arithmetic block inside the loop body to
increment the counter variable

> Unchecked Loop increment

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Unchecked Loop Increment
```

------------------------

Introduced in solidity ``0.8.22``, this optimizer step is concerned with identifying
the conditions under which the code of a ``for`` loop counter can be incremented
without overflow checks.
The optimization is always turned on by default and can only
be turned off by setting the ``simpleCounterForLoopUncheckedIncrement`` flag to
false inside ``settings.optimizer.details`` in Standard JSON input.
It is not possible to disable it using the command-line interface.

> This optimization is only applied to `for` loops which use built-in operators ``<`` in the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This optimization is **only** applied to ``for`` loops which use built-in operators ``<`` in the
```

condition and (postfix/prefix) ``++`` in the lopp expression with the general form:

.. code-block:: solidity

    for (uint i = 0; i < x; ++i) {
      // variable i is not modified in the loop body
    }

In many cases, the comparison is guaranteed to ensure that the counter variable
never overflows. The precise conditions are listed and explained as follows:

 - The loop condition is a comparison of the form ``i < x``, for a local counter variable ``i`` and a potentially complex expression ``x``.

>  - Built-in operator ``<`` only is used in the loop condition. User-defined operators are **not** eligible.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 - Built-in operator ``<`` is used only in the loop condition. User-defined operators are **not** eligible.
```

Author: Actually, here I wanted to say that the only operator allowed in the comparison is the built-in  `<`. 
Supposedly, that would be already clear from the previous point, but I wanted to make it very obvious with another remark...but maybe, overkill?

Reviewer 3: Right. The current version is good as well.

    }

The LiteralRematerialiser should be run before this step.

Codegen-Based Optimizer Module
==============================

Currently, the codegen-based optimizer module consists of only one step,
which makes the compiler automatically generate unchecked arithmetic code that
increments the counter variable of a `for` loop. The single step of this module,
which is explained next, avoids wasting gas unnecessarily, by identifying some
conditions that guarantee that the counter variable cannot overflow. This eliminates

> the need to use a explicit unchecked arithmetic block inside the loop body to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the need to use an explicit unchecked arithmetic block inside the loop body to
```

> increment the counter variable

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
increment the counter variable.
```

Unchecked Loop Increment
------------------------

Introduced in solidity ``0.8.22``, this optimizer step is concerned with identifying

> the conditions under which the code of a ``for`` loop counter can be incremented

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the conditions under which the ``for`` loop counter can be incremented
```

without overflow checks.
The optimization is always turned on by default and can only
be turned off by setting the ``simpleCounterForLoopUncheckedIncrement`` flag to
false inside ``settings.optimizer.details`` in Standard JSON input.
It is not possible to disable it using the command-line interface.
This optimization is **only** applied to ``for`` loops which use built-in operators ``<`` in the

> condition and (postfix/prefix) ``++`` in the lopp expression with the general form:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
condition and (postfix/prefix) ``++`` in the loop expression with the general form:
```

> condition and (postfix/prefix) ``++`` in the lopp expression with the general form:

Reviewer 3: Reading this sentence again, I'm wondering if it is even needed, since we describe the precise conditions below. But I'm fine either way.

Author: Yeah, it's a bit redundant. I guess I like to do that to make things pretty clear, but sometimes it's just too much :)

Reviewer: I mean, it's not a bad idea to have a short summary. Just here it seems unnecessary, being literally next to the whole list, which isn't even that long :)

> condition and (postfix/prefix) ``++`` in the lopp expression with the general form:

Reviewer: I think this could use some paragraph breaks. It covers three different things (what it is, how to disable it and the general form of the loop).

Actually, the bit about when it is enabled and how to disable it is probably unnecessary. It was useful in the context of the blog post, but here we don't seem to mention this for other steps.

Author: Ok. I removed the part about enabling/disabling.

.. code-block:: solidity

>     for (uint i = 0; i < x; ++i) {
>       // variable i is not modified in the loop body
>     }

Reviewer: The current form suggests that it has to start at 0.

```suggestion
    for (uint i = X; i < Y; ++i) {
        // variable i is not modified in the loop body
    }
```

Author: Done.

> In many cases, the comparison is guaranteed to ensure that the counter variable
> never overflows. The precise conditions are listed and explained as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The condition and the fact that the counter variable is only ever incremented
guarantee that it never overflows.
The precise requirements for the loop to be eligible for the optimization are as follows:
```

 - The loop condition is a comparison of the form ``i < x``, for a local counter variable ``i`` and an expression ``x``.
 - The built-in operator ``<`` is necessarily used in the loop condition. User-defined operators are **not** eligible.
 - The loop expression is a prefix or postfix increment of the counter variable, i.e, ``i++`` or ``++i``.
 - The loop counter is a local declared variable of a built-in integer type.
 - The loop counter is **not** modified neither in the body nor in the condition.

>  - The comparison is performed on the same type of the loop counter, meaning that the type of the right-hand-side expression is implicitly convertible to the type of the counter, such that the latter is not implicitly widened before comparing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - The comparison is performed on the same type as the loop counter, meaning that the type of the right-hand-side expression is implicitly convertible to the type of the counter, such that the latter is not implicitly widened before comparing.
```

I think I actually suggested that already in the blog post. Looking at it, some of these points sounded more natural the way the way they were worded there.

.. _unchecked-loop-optimizer:

Unchecked Loop Increment
------------------------

Introduced in solidity ``0.8.22``, this optimizer step is concerned with identifying
the conditions under which the ``for`` loop counter can be incremented
without overflow checks.

This optimization is **only** applied to ``for`` loops with the general form:

.. code-block:: solidity

    for (uint i = X; i < Y; ++i) {
        // variable i is not modified in the loop body
    }

The condition and the fact that the counter variable is only ever incremented
guarantee that it never overflows.
The precise requirements for the loop to be eligible for the optimization are as follows:

 - The loop condition is a comparison of the form ``i < Y``, for a local counter variable ``i`` and an expression ``Y``.
 - The built-in operator ``<`` is necessarily used in the loop condition. User-defined operators are **not** eligible.
 - The loop expression is a prefix or postfix increment of the counter variable, i.e, ``i++`` or ``++i``.
 - The loop counter is a local declared variable of a built-in integer type.
 - The loop counter is **not** modified neither in the body nor in the condition.

>  - The comparison is performed on the same type as the loop counter, meaning that the type of the right-hand-side expression is implicitly convertible to the type of the counter, such that the latter is not implicitly widened before comparing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The loop condition is a comparison of the form ``i < Y``, for a local counter variable ``i`` and an expression ``Y``.
- The built-in operator ``<`` is necessarily used in the loop condition. User-defined operators are **not** eligible.
- The loop expression is a prefix or postfix increment of the counter variable, i.e, ``i++`` or ``++i``.
- The loop counter is a local declared variable of a built-in integer type.
- The loop counter is **not** modified neither in the body nor in the condition.
- The comparison is performed on the same type as the loop counter, meaning that the type of the right-hand-side expression is implicitly convertible to the type of the counter, such that the latter is not implicitly widened before comparing.
```

This actually not only cosmetic because with that extra space RST renders the list differently (it's indented deeper than normal lists), so it's apparently seen as some special syntax.

Author: Sorry, I didn't notice that.

    }

The LiteralRematerialiser should be run before this step.

Codegen-Based Optimizer Module
==============================

Currently, the codegen-based optimizer module consists of two distinct steps.

The first step moves literals to the right of commutative binary operators which

> helps exploiting associativity.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
helps exploit associativity.
```

The second step uses unchecked arithmetic when generating code for incrementing
the counter variable of specific ``for`` loops. This

> avoids wasting gas by identifying some conditions that guarantee

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
avoids gas wastage by identifying some conditions that guarantee
```

Reviewer: I guess `gas wastage` is not wrong, but sounds extremely formal to me :) Not sure I ever heard anyone phrase it that way when referring to wasting gas.

Reviewer 4: Ahh, I see. :D I am not picky about it, it's just how I would've phrased it originally.

Reviewer: No worries, proofreading this is very helpful to us and I like your other suggestions. Just this one stood out to me as unusual :)

Reviewer 4: No worries! I think its a good exercise for me as well to align my writing style with the team's and also generally understand what suits well on our blog. :)

Author: I will keep "wasting" as is. Thanks for the suggestion though @mehtavishwa30 !

> that the counter variable cannot overflow. This eliminates the need to use an explicit

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
that the counter variable cannot overflow. This eliminates the need to use a verbose
```

unchecked arithmetic block inside the loop body to increment the counter variable.

.. _unchecked-loop-optimizer:

Unchecked Loop Increment
------------------------

> Introduced in Solidity ``0.8.22``, this optimizer step is concerned with identifying

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Introduced in Solidity ``0.8.22``, the overflow check optimization step is concerned with identifying
```

the conditions under which the ``for`` loop counter can be safely incremented
without overflow checks.

> This optimization is **only** applied to ``for`` loops with the general form:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This optimization is **only** applied to ``for`` loops of the general form:
```

.. code-block:: solidity

>     for (uint i = X; i < Y; ++i) {
>         // variable i is not modified in the loop body

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    for (uint i = X; i < array.length; ++i) {
        acc += array[i]; // variable "i" is not modified in the loop body
```

Reviewer: This would be perfectly fine if this was just an example, but the sentence above describes it as the "general form" of the loop. We refer to `Y` later, so I think it would be better to leave it as is.

Reviewer 4: Right, that makes more sense. :)

    }

The condition and the fact that the counter variable is only ever incremented
guarantee that it never overflows.
The precise requirements for the loop to be eligible for the optimization are as follows:

> - The loop condition is a comparison of the form ``i < Y``, for a local counter variable ``i`` and an expression ``Y``.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- The loop condition is a comparison of the form ``i < ...``, for a local counter variable ``i`` (called the "loop counter" hereon).
```

Author: I feel it is best to keep "Y", because I think it is good to connect with the previous code snippet and also it helps to express next in the sentence that it can be an expression, not just a literal or variable.

> - The built-in operator ``<`` is necessarily used in the loop condition. User-defined operators are **not** eligible.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- The built-in operator ``<`` is necessarily used in the loop condition and is the only operator that triggers the optimization. ``<=`` and the like are intentionally excluded. Additionally, user-defined operators are **not** eligible.
```

- The loop expression is a prefix or postfix increment of the counter variable, i.e, ``i++`` or ``++i``.

> - The loop counter is a local declared variable of a built-in integer type.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- The loop counter is a locally declared variable of a built-in integer type.
```

Reviewer 4: Small nitpick but "local declared" reads weird. Maybe "local variable" or "locally declared variable"?

Author: Yeah, it is weird, I guess I wanted to write locally declared. But I think "local variable" is better. Thanks!

- The loop counter is **not** modified by the loop body or by the expression used as the loop condition.
- The comparison is performed on the same type as the loop counter, meaning that the type of the

>   right-hand-side expression is implicitly convertible to the type of the counter, such that the latter

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  right-hand-side expression is implicitly convertible to the type of the loop counter, such that the loop counter
```

Author: I will change to "loop counter". But, in this case, I used "latter" to avoid having the word "counter" repeated so closely. So I think that it is better as is.
What do you think about it?

Reviewer 4: I guess it does become a little repetitive without "latter", I agree. I just tend to avoid noun phrases or implicit references in docs for better readability. But it's a personal preference, so it's totally fine to ignore the second suggestion and keep it as is. :)

>   is not implicitly widened before comparing.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  is not implicitly widened before the comparison.
```
